---
layout: page
description: "Front page for the website of Kevin Locke, a software developer \
from Montana."
---
<h1>Welcome</h1>
<p>Welcome to Kevin Locke's home on the web.  This site is a collection of odds
and ends that I have created, which may be of interest or use to you, the
reader.  For more information about me, other projects which are not listed
here, or to send suggestions or comments, <a href="/contact">contact
me</a>.  Enjoy!</p>

<h2>Which Kevin Locke is this?</h2>
<p>As unusual as this may sound, there are more than one of me.  Or, at
least, there is more than one person with the name Kevin Locke.  So, 
to differentiate myself from the other Kevin Lockes of the world,
here's a quick description of who I am and some pointers to a few other Kevin
Lockes that I have come across on the web:</p>
<p>I am the son of William Locke and Charlene Locke, and the brother of Brian
Locke.  I grew up in Bozeman, MT (in the United States), graduated Magna with a
B.S. in C.S. from Cornell University in Ithaca, NY, was co-founder and
president of <a href="https://digitalenginesoftware.com">Digital
Engine Software</a>, and served as the Director of Engineering at <a href="https://quantpost.com">Quantpost</a>.  I am often involved in Free and Open-Source
Software and the community surrounding it.  If you are still unsure if I am the
Kevin Locke you are looking for, see if one of my <a href="/contact">contact
points</a> looks familiar, or feel free to ask me.</p>

<h3>Other Kevin Lockes</h3>
<ul>
<li>The Native American flutist and hoop dancer named Kevin Locke's website is 
at <a href="http://www.kevinlocke.com">kevinlocke.com</a> along with a
Wikipedia page for
<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kevin_Locke_%28musician%29">Kevin Locke</a>.</li>
<li>The New Zealand rugby league footballer named Kevin Locke who is also
described in a Wikipedia page for
<a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kevin_Locke_%28rugby_league%29">Kevin Locke</a>.</li>
<li>The software developer Kevin D. Locke, who lives in Washington State
maintains a blog at <a href="http://www.kevindlocke.com/">kevindlocke.com</a>.</li>
<li>The photographer Kevin R. Locke, who lives in Washington DC, has a
website at <a href="http://kevinlocke.net">kevinlocke.net</a>.</li>
<li>A Texan named Kevin Locke of the Locke Family Association, is listed at
<a href="http://www.lockefamilyassociation.org/kkor.htm">lockefamilyassociation.org</a>.</li>
</ul>
