---
layout: post
date: 2012-08-31 15:25:58-06:00
title: BoneCP 0.8.0-alpha1 unusable with Lift Squeryl-Record
description: "Discussion of the symptoms observed when using \
BoneCP 0.8.0-alpha1 with Squeryl-Record in Lift."
tags: [ lift ]
---
In tracking down some persistent errors relating to using
[Squeryl](http://squeryl.org) with [Lift](http://liftweb.net/), I've found that
the latest version of [BoneCP](http://jolbox.com/) does not appear to be safe
for use in this scenario.  This article is a quick discussion of the symptoms
that I am seeing and how to avoid them.

<!--more-->

## The Setup

The setup that I am using is quite generic and based on the example
configurations on the [Squeryl-Record wiki
page](https://www.assembla.com/wiki/show/liftweb/Squeryl).  Basically, I'm
using the following code in my Lift Boot class:

    Props.get("db.driver") map { Class.forName(_) }

    val config = new BoneCPConfig()
    config.setCloseConnectionWatch(true)
    Props.get("db.jdbcUrl") map { config.setJdbcUrl(_) }
    Props.get("db.username") map { config.setUsername(_) }
    Props.get("db.password") map { config.setPassword(_) }

    val connPool = new BoneCP(config)
    val adapterName = Props.get("db.squerylAdapter").open_!
    var adapterClass = Class.forName(adapterName).asInstanceOf[Class[DatabaseAdapter]]
    // Note:  Passed by name, called repeatedly
    net.liftweb.squerylrecord.SquerylRecord.initWithSquerylSession(
        Session.create(connPool.getConnection, adapterClass.newInstance)
    )

    S.addAround(new LoanWrapper {
      override def apply[T](f: => T): T = inTransaction { f }
    })

## The Symptoms

With the above code in place (and some pages which make read queries), I would
see the following log messages:

    [com.google.common.base.internal.Finalizer] WARN  c.jolbox.bonecp.ConnectionPartition - BoneCP detected an unclosed connection and will now attempt to close it for you. You should be closing this connection in your application - enable connectionWatch for additional debugging assistance.

Which would be followed (on the next page access) by:

    \[qtp3266018-33 - /path\] ERROR net.liftweb.http.LiftRules - Exception being returned to browser when processing /path: Message: org.postgresql.util.PSQLException: This connection has been closed.

So, as suggested in the warning message, I tried enabling connectionWatch,
which had no effect.  It appears that this [is only helpful if a thread holding
an open connection dies](http://forum.jolbox.com/viewtopic.php?f=3&t=213#p874).

Next I created a proxy for Connection to observe creation/close and it appears
that all connections (technically, connection handles, since BoneCP manages the
real connections) are being closed.

At this point I started to suspect an issue in BoneCP, so I tried downgrading
to 0.7.1.RELEASE and all of the problems vanished.  Hopefully this solution
will work for others in the same situation as well as it did for me.
