---
layout: post
date: 2019-12-28 18:58:25-07:00
title: Checking 802.11w (MFP/PMF) Support (on Linux)
description: 
tags: [ linux ]
---

[IEEE 802.11w-2009](https://wikipedia.org/wiki/IEEE_802.11w-2009) defines a
mechanism for cryptographically protecting 802.11 management frames to prevent
[deauthentication
attacks](https://wikipedia.org/wiki/Wi-Fi_deauthentication_attack) (such as
the [deauthentication attacks recently discussed on Hacker
News](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=21889837)).  The feature is often
referred to as "Protected Management Frames (PMF)" or "Management Frame
Protection (MFP)" and is required by
[WPA3](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wi-Fi_Protected_Access#WPA3).

While configuring and testing 802.11w, I found it difficult to determine
whether 802.11w was supported, enabled, and/or required on each device and
network.  This post documents the methods that I used.

<!--more-->


## Checking Hardware Support with DebugFS

Linux drivers set the
[`IEEE80211_HW_MFP_CAPABLE`](https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/tree/include/net/mac80211.h?h=v5.4#n2127)
flag for hardware which supports 802.11w.  On kernels built with
`CONFIG_MAC80211_DEBUGFS` and `debugfs` mounted at `/sys/kernel/debug`, this
can be checked by running:

```sh
grep MFP_CAPABLE /sys/kernel/debug/ieee80211/phy0/hwflags
```

(Replacing `phy0` with the PHY device of interest.)


## Checking Hardware Support with iw

On kernels built without `CONFIG_MAC80211_DEBUGFS`, the `flags` member of
`struct ieee80211_hw` does not appear to be exposed to user-space.  The best
indicator I have found is to check for [cipher suites which are only supported
on MFP-capable
hardware](https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/tree/net/mac80211/main.c?h=v5.4#n736)
(`AES-CMAC`, `BIP-CMAC-256`, `BIP-GMAC-128`, and `BIP-GMAC-256`) using the
[`iw`](https://wireless.wiki.kernel.org/en/users/documentation/iw) command.
For example, to check whether `phy0` supports `AES-CMAC` (`00-0f-ac:6`):

```sh
iw phy phy0 info | grep 00-0f-ac:6
```

If `00-0f-ac:6` is included in the output, 802.11w is supported.  Note that
listing ciphers requires the `iw-full` package on
[OpenWRT](https://openwrt.org/).  Also note that `phy0 info` can be omitted
from the above command to check for support on any PHY.

Additionally, to check whether the driver+firmware supports optional 802.11w,
ensure you are using `iw` 5.0 or later and look for `MFP_OPTIONAL` in
`Supported extended features:` in the `iw phy` output.


## Checking Available Network Support

To check whether a network within scanning range supports or requires 802.11w,
you can run:

```sh
iw dev wlan0 scan ssid NetworkName
```

(Replacing `wlan0` with the desired wireless interface to use for scanning.)
If `RSN Capabilities` includes `MFP-required`, the station requires 802.11w.
If `RSN Capabilities` includes `MFP-capable`, 802.11w is available, but
clients are not required to use it.  Note that **even network cards which do
not support 802.11w can report this information**.  Also note that `ssid
NetworkName` can be omitted to view all networks.


## Checking Network Support on AP

To check which stations managed by interfaces on an access point support or
require 802.11w, run:

```sh
iw dev wlan0 station dump
```

(Replacing `wlan0` with the wireless interface upon which the station is
configured.)  `MFP: yes` indicates that 802.11w is required by the station.
`MFP: no` indicates that 802.11w is either optional or not supported
by the station.  (Unfortunately, I have not yet found a way to distinguish
optional from unsupported.)
