---
layout: page
title: DuelTracker WoW AddOn
description: "A World of Warcraft AddOn for tracking the results of duels, \
both on the user's character and others."
---
<h1>DuelTracker</h1>

<h2>Description</h2>
<p>DuelTracker is a <a href="http://www.worldofwarcraft.com/">World of 
Warcraft</a> AddOn which collects information about duels that the user 
observes.  Specifically, it collects information about the names, 
races, classes, levels, and guilds of the duelers along with the type of 
victory (fled or defeated).  It can then produce statistics from the
data which are presented to the user or to other players (if configured to
do so) using a text/message-oriented interface.  Advanced users can 
also export statistics and records in 
<a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comma-separated_values">CSV</a> format
for use by other programs.</p>

<h2>Features</h2>
<ol>
<li>Unobtrusive operation (unnoticeable under most circumstances, configurable)</li>
<li>Supports multiple mechanisms of gathering information (from who queries
and optionally targeting)</li>
<li>Supports messaging statistics to other players by request (configurable)</li>
<li>Supports export to CSV formats (requires Lua interpreter)</li>
</ol>

<h2>Development Status</h2>
<p>Usable, but lacking features.  I have not been playing WoW much lately,
and for that reason, I haven't put much effort into DuelTracker for a while. 
Therefore, I encourage anyone interested in developing it further to go for it
and feel free to send me any development questions.</p>

<h2>License</h2>
<p><a href="http://www.opensource.org/licenses/mit-license.php">MIT/Expat</a></p>

<h2>Supported Systems</h2>
<ul>
<li>Any system running World of Warcraft.</li>
</ul>

<h2>Dependencies</h2>
<ul>
<li>A <a href="http://luabinaries.luaforge.net/">Lua interpreter</a> required 
for exporting to CSV.</li>
</ul>

<h2>Installing</h2>
<ol>
<li><a href="dueltracker-004.zip">Download it</a></li>
<li>Unzip it into the World of Warcraft Interface AddOns directory
(usually C:\Program Files\World of Warcraft\Interface\AddOns)</li>
<li>Run World of Warcraft and confirm that it is properly loaded by clicking
on the AddOns button from the Character Selection Screen</li>
</ol>

<h2>Example Usage</h2>
<ul>
<li>Type <code>/dueltracker help</code> in the chat window for a list of 
possible commands.</li>
<li>Type <code>/dueltracker config</code> in the chat window to view the
current configuration options.</li>
<li>Type <code>/dueltracker stats</code> in the chat window to view the duel 
statistics for your player or <code>/dueltracker stats Gandalf</code> to view
the statistics for the player named Gandalf.</li>
<li>Whisper <code>.duel stats Gandalf</code> to someone running DuelTracker, 
which is configured to respond to whispers for information, to get the 
statistics for the player named Gandalf from that player's records.</li>
</ul>

<h2>Configuration</h2>
<p>DuelTracker can be configured by typing <code>/dueltracker config [option 
value]</code> into the chat window.  This will set <em>option</em> to
<em>value</em>.  For a list of available configuration options, type 
<code>/dueltracker config</code>.  A complete explanation of the options
is provided in the README.txt file.</p>

<h2>Known Bugs</h2>
<p>If the user sends a who request at the same time that DuelTracker does
the user will not see any results from their query.  This is currently 
minimized as much as possible by using a player information cache and by 
limiting the time that the event is disconnected as much as possible. 
The user may also configure DuelTracker to use targeting for gathering 
information which will further reduce the appearance of this bug.</p>

<h2>Planned Features</h2>
<ul>
<li>Synchronization between players (timestamping already in place)</li>
<li>Improve resolution of timestamping using system clock and OnUpdate</li>
<li>GUI tab for statistics in the player interface box</li>
<li>Integration with graphical configuration systems</li>
<li>Remove need to install a Lua interpreter to export data...</li>
</ul>
