---
layout: page
title: Linkd - Motorola SB4100 Link Daemon
description: "A program to monitor and automatically reboot a Motorola SB4100 \
cable modem."
---
<h1>Linkd: Motorola SB4100 Link Daemon</h1>

<h2>Description</h2>
<p>Linkd is a small daemon which will cause the SB4100 to restart when it
stops working.  Linkd monitors the network rate on a specified interface and
when it drops below a given threshold linkd will attempt to ping a given
address.  If the ping fails, an HTTP POST packet is sent to the SB4100 which
is equivalent to pressing the "Restart Cable Modem" button in its
web-interface.  This will cause the modem to restart and (for me) is sufficient
to get traffic flowing over the link again.</p>
<p>For the less pedantic and more practical, contacting your cable company and
replacing your cable modem are probably better solutions.  My efforts in
this respect were somewhat less useful and rather than spending the money out
of my own pocket to buy a new cable modem, I wrote this program.</p>

<h2>Supported Systems</h2>
<ul>
<li>Linux 2.4/2.6</li>
</ul>

<h2>Development Status</h2>
<p>Works for me.  I am planning to add a few more command-switches to ease
use of the program and add a startup script to the package.  If this 
program finds an audience, more features could be added...</p>

<h2>License</h2>
<p><a href="http://www.opensource.org/licenses/bsd-license.php">BSD</a></p>

<h2>Installing</h2>
<ol>
<li><a href="linkd.c">Download it</a></li>
<li>Change any definitions appropriately in linkd.c using a text editor</li>
<li>Compile it (e.x. <code>cc -o linkd linkd.c</code>)</li>
<li>Run it</li>
<li>Optionally add it to startup scripts with the -d command line option to
continually monitor your network link</li>
</ol>

<h2>Configuration</h2>
<p>Almost all of the linkd configuration is done by changing defined macros
in the C source file to appropriate values.  The purpose of each definition
is commented in the source file.  Definitions of particular interest are
MODEM_IP, PING_ARGS, and possibly NET_RATE_THRESH.  At a very minimum, 
please change the IP in PING_ARGS so that all users of this program won't be
pinging the same address to check connectivity.  Note that the network
rate threshold is non-zero because (at least for my setup) there is a
significant number of ARP packets which are delivered when the modem is
down.</p>
