---
layout: page
title: PIV - Perl Image Viewer
description: "A no-frills image viewer originally written in Perl."
---
<h2>PIV - Perl Image Viewer</h2>

<h3>Description</h3>
<p>PIV is a no-frills image viewer built using
<a href="http://gtk2-perl.sourceforge.net/">GTK2-Perl</a>.  It was designed
as a replacement for <a href="http://www.klografx.net/qiv/">qiv</a>, after a
great deal of personal frustration with qiv.  It also happens to be the
first program of any size that I have written in Perl - so it is a bit of
a learning experiment.
</p>

<h3>Features</h3>
<ul>
<li>Fullscreen and windowed mode</li>
<li>Slideshow mode with variable delay</li>
<li>Zoom and mouse navigation</li>
<li>Randomized and sorted modes</li>
<li>Handles all image formats supported by
<a href="http://developer.gnome.org/arch/imaging/gdkpixbuf.html">GdkPixbuf</a></li>
</ul>

<h3>Development Status</h3>
<p>Still a work in progress.  PIV is lacking several features and a good
deal of polish.  Although I am happy with where it is, there are a lot
more details that need work and I am sporadically attempting to deal with
them.  As with all my projects, feature suggestions, patches, and all
other contributions are welcome.  If you are interested in contributing,
just let me know what you are working on to prevent duplication.</p>

<h3>License</h3>
<p><a href="http://www.opensource.org/licenses/mit-license.php">MIT</a></p>

<h3>Supported Systems</h3>
<p>Should work on any system with Perl and the GTK2-Perl library.</p>

<h3>Dependencies</h3>
<ul>
<li><a href="http://www.perl.org/get.html">Perl</a></li>
<li><a href="http://gtk2-perl.sourceforge.net/">GTK2-Perl</a> 1.140 or
higher</li>
<li><a href="http://search.cpan.org/~chamas/Tie-Cache-0.17/">Tie::Cache</a> module</li>
</ul>

<h3>Installing</h3>
<ol>
<li>Download and install Tie::Cache from CPAN (<code>perl -MCPAN -e 'install
       Tie::Cache'</code> or <code>apt-get install libtie-cache-perl</code> on
       Debian or Debian-based distros)</li>
<li><a href="piv.pl">Download it</a></li>
<li>Mark it executable (<code>chmod +x piv</code>)</li>
<li>Run it.</li>
</ol>

<h3>Documentation</h3>
<p>PIV has user documentation in the form of
<a href="http://perldoc.perl.org/perlpod.html"><abbr title="Plain Old Documentation">POD</abbr></a>,
which can be converted into a manual page using
<a href="http://perldoc.perl.org/pod2man.html">pod2man</a>.  To view the
manual page simply run <code>pod2man piv | man -l -</code> (or, if your
viewer does not like reading from stdin, <code>pod2man bin/piv > piv.1 ; man
piv.1</code>).</p>

<h3>Configuration</h3>
<p>Configuration file support is on the TODO list, but none is currently
supported.  Key mappings can be changed by editing the hash at the top
of piv (which is pretty intuitive even to those new to Perl).  All other
options can be changed at runtime using the control keys described in the
manual page.</p>

<h3>Known Bugs</h3>
<ul>
<li>The slide delay status message does not fade out at the correct time and
instead fades out on the next redraw.</li>
</ul>

<h3>Planned Features</h3>
<ul>
<li>Configuration file support</li>
<li>Support for running commands from inside the viewer, like qiv</li>
<li>Better status displays (visually more appealing and more functional)</li>
<li>More sorting and randomization options</li>
</ul>
